---
layout: post
title: Android Development and Ant
published: true
tags: [android, ant, development]
---

When thinking about automatiing the building/testing of an Android project I ran
across the necessity to do so from the command line and not using Eclipse. After
some searching I found that its quite easy to get this done with the tools that
Android has already available which can generate a simple build.xml file to be
use for building/installing/packaging an Android project.

To build your Ant build file you can use simply the following from the root
of your project:

<pre>
android update project -p .
</pre>

Now if you need to link additional Android projects to this one you can do so
with the following command:

<pre>
android update project -p . -l path/to/other/android/project
</pre>

To see the available targets just issue the ususal: *ant -p* and you'll get all
of the available targets:

<pre>
Main targets:

 clean      Removes output files created by other targets.
 compile    Compiles project's .java files into .class files
 debug      Builds the application and signs it with a debug key.
 install    Installs/reinstalls the debug package onto a running emulator or
            device. If the application was previously installed, the signatures
            must match.
 release    Builds the application. The generated apk file must be signed before                             it is published.
 uninstall  Uninstalls the application from a running emulator or device.
Default target: help
</pre>