---
layout: post
title: Introducing DTF
published: true
tags: [dtf, testing]
---

DTF is my testing framework that has been in development for 4+ years and has
survived my transition from Sun Microsystems to Yahoo. It was open sourced since
May 2010. Now that I have my blog up and running I thought I'd make one of my
first posts be an introduction to DTF and what it can do.

To start DTF stands for Distributed Testing Framework and it is written in 100%
Java so that it can be easily executed on any environment where Java is
supported. The tests in DTF are written in XML and unlike some of the XML
languages you've seen its sort of a mash-up of Ant + Jelly + Some additional
features you've never seen in XML.

The biggest advantage in DTF vs any other Java based distributed testing tool is
that you can write a test that interacts with N different machines and the test
explicitly describes all of the interactions of the components in your system
in one easy to read XML. Most other framework rely on multiple configuration
files and even different files to describe the behavior of each peace. Aside
from that there is also the feature to deploy your setup to your host machines
from a single machine using an XML format to describe your setup.

With all of this the best thing to do is to start by reading the documentation
written for those interested in DTF and to start really digging in to what DTF
can do for you. DTF's documentation can be found here: https://github.com/rlgomes/dtf/wiki
